src/lte/doc/source/lte-pathloss-testing.rst, before:

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
 Pathloss Model Testing Documentation
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++


Overview
********

To test and validate the ns-3 Building Pathloss module, a test suites is provided which are integrated with the ns-3 test framework in the lte module.
To run them, you need to have configured the build of the simulator in this way::

    ./waf configure --enable-tests --enable-modules=lte --enable-examples
    ./test.py

The above will run not only the test suites belonging to the LTE module, but also those belonging to all the other ns-3 modules on which the LTE module depends. See the ns-3 manual for generic information on the testing framework.

You can get a more detailed report in HTML format in this way::

    ./test.py -w results.html

After the above command has run, you can view the detailed result for each test by opening the file ``results.html`` with a web browser. 

You can run each test suite separately using this command::

    ./test.py -s test-suite-name

For more details about ``test.py`` and the ns-3 testing framework, please refer to the ns-3 manual.



Description of the test suite
*****************************

The test suite ``lte-pathloss-model`` creates different test cases with
both unit and system tests. The formers validate the single component model and the pathloss logic behavior. The latter proof the integration of the pathloss model in the ns3 framework and more in specifically in the lte module.

Unit Tests
~~~~~~~~~~

The unit tests are carried out by comparing the expected results of the pathloss module in specific scenarios with pre calculated values obtained offline with an Octave script (/test/reference/lte-pathloss.m). The tests are considered passed if the two values differs only for a predefined tolerance (0.1) that accounts for the approximations due to floating point arithmetics.

In the following we detailed the scenarios considered, their selection has been done for covering the wide set of possible pathloss logic combinations. The pathloss logic results therefore implicitly tested.

Test #1 Okumura Hata
--------------------

In this test we test the standard Okumura Hata model; therefore both eNB and UE are placed outside at a distance of 2000 m. The frequency used is the E-UTRA band #5, which correspond to 869 MHz (see table 5.5-1 of 36.101). The test includes also the validation of the areas extensions (i.e., urban, suburban and open-areas) and of the city size (small, medium and large).

Test #2 COST231 Model
---------------------

This test is aimed at validating the COST231 model. The test is similar to the Okumura Hata one, except that the frequency used is the EUTRA band #1 (2140 MHz) and that the test can be perfomed only for large and small cities in urban scenarios due to model limitations.

Test #3 2.6 GHz model
---------------------

This test validates the 2.6 empirical model [pl26ghz]_. The test is similar to Okumura Hata one except that the frequency is the EUTRA band #7 (2620 MHz) and the test can be performed only in urban scenario.

Test #4 ITU1411 LoS model
-------------------------

This test is aimed at validating the ITU1411 model in case of line of sight within street canyons transmissions. In this case the UE is placed at 100 meters far from the eNB, since the threshold for switching between LoS and NLoS is left to default one (i.e., 200 m.).

Test #5 ITU1411 NLoS model
--------------------------

This test is aimed at validating the ITU1411 model in case of non line of sight over the rooftop transmissions. In this case the UE is placed at 900 meters far from the eNB, in order to be above the threshold for switching between LoS and NLoS is left to default one (i.e., 200 m.).

Test #6 ITUP1238 model
----------------------

This test is aimed at validating the ITUP1238 model in case of indoor transmissions. In this case both the UE and the eNB are placed in a residential building with walls made of concrete with windows. Ue is placed at the second floor and distances 30 meters far from the eNB, which is placed at the first floor.

Test #7 Outdoor -> Indoor with Okumura Hata model
-------------------------------------------------

This test validates the outdoor to indoor transmissions for large distances. In this case the UE is placed in a residential building with wall made of concrete with windows and distances 2000 meters from the outdoor eNB.

Test #8 Outdoor -> Indoor with ITU1411 model
-------------------------------------------------

This test validates the outdoor to indoor transmissions for short distances. In this case the UE is placed in a residential building with walls made of concrete with windows and distances 100 meters from the outdoor eNB.


Test #9 Indoor -> Outdoor with ITU1411 model
-------------------------------------------------

This test validates the outdoor to indoor transmissions for very short distances. In this case the eNB is placed in the second floor of a residential building with walls made of concrete with windows and distances 100 meters from the outdoor UE (i.e., LoS communication). Therefore the height gain has to be included in the pathloss evaluation.

Test #10 Indoor -> Outdoor with ITU1411 model
-------------------------------------------------

This test validates the outdoor to indoor transmissions for short distances. In this case the eNB is placed in the second floor of a residential building with walls made of concrete with windows and distances 500 meters from the outdoor UE (i.e., NLoS communication). Therefore the height gain has to be included in the pathloss evaluation.


System Test
~~~~~~~~~~~

The aim of the system test is to verify the integration of the BuildingPathlossModel with the ns3 simulator and in particular with the lte module. The test exploits a set of three pre calculated losses for generating the expected SINR at the receiver counting the transmission and the noise powers. These SINR values are compared with the results obtained from a lte simulation. The losses are calculated off-line with an Octave script (/test/reference/lte-pathloss.m).

Commit message:

Add documentation on shadowing test

src/lte/doc/source/lte-pathloss-testing.rst, after:

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
 Pathloss Model Testing Documentation
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++


Overview
********

To test and validate the ns-3 Building Pathloss module, a test suites is provided which are integrated with the ns-3 test framework in the lte module.
To run them, you need to have configured the build of the simulator in this way::

    ./waf configure --enable-tests --enable-modules=lte --enable-examples
    ./test.py

The above will run not only the test suites belonging to the LTE module, but also those belonging to all the other ns-3 modules on which the LTE module depends. See the ns-3 manual for generic information on the testing framework.

You can get a more detailed report in HTML format in this way::

    ./test.py -w results.html

After the above command has run, you can view the detailed result for each test by opening the file ``results.html`` with a web browser. 

You can run each test suite separately using this command::

    ./test.py -s test-suite-name

For more details about ``test.py`` and the ns-3 testing framework, please refer to the ns-3 manual.



Description of the test suite
*****************************

The test suite ``lte-pathloss-model`` creates different test cases with
both unit and system tests. The formers validate the single component model and the pathloss logic behavior. The latter proof the integration of the pathloss model in the ns3 framework and more in specifically in the lte module. Finally. a unit test is provided in order to test the shadowing characterization.

Unit Tests
~~~~~~~~~~

The unit tests are carried out by comparing the expected results of the pathloss module in specific scenarios with pre calculated values obtained offline with an Octave script (/test/reference/lte-pathloss.m). The tests are considered passed if the two values differs only for a predefined tolerance (0.1) that accounts for the approximations due to floating point arithmetics.

In the following we detailed the scenarios considered, their selection has been done for covering the wide set of possible pathloss logic combinations. The pathloss logic results therefore implicitly tested.

Test #1 Okumura Hata
--------------------

In this test we test the standard Okumura Hata model; therefore both eNB and UE are placed outside at a distance of 2000 m. The frequency used is the E-UTRA band #5, which correspond to 869 MHz (see table 5.5-1 of 36.101). The test includes also the validation of the areas extensions (i.e., urban, suburban and open-areas) and of the city size (small, medium and large).

Test #2 COST231 Model
---------------------

This test is aimed at validating the COST231 model. The test is similar to the Okumura Hata one, except that the frequency used is the EUTRA band #1 (2140 MHz) and that the test can be performed only for large and small cities in urban scenarios due to model limitations.

Test #3 2.6 GHz model
---------------------

This test validates the 2.6 empirical model [pl26ghz]_. The test is similar to Okumura Hata one except that the frequency is the EUTRA band #7 (2620 MHz) and the test can be performed only in urban scenario.

Test #4 ITU1411 LoS model
-------------------------

This test is aimed at validating the ITU1411 model in case of line of sight within street canyons transmissions. In this case the UE is placed at 100 meters far from the eNB, since the threshold for switching between LoS and NLoS is left to default one (i.e., 200 m.).

Test #5 ITU1411 NLoS model
--------------------------

This test is aimed at validating the ITU1411 model in case of non line of sight over the rooftop transmissions. In this case the UE is placed at 900 meters far from the eNB, in order to be above the threshold for switching between LoS and NLoS is left to default one (i.e., 200 m.).

Test #6 ITUP1238 model
----------------------

This test is aimed at validating the ITUP1238 model in case of indoor transmissions. In this case both the UE and the eNB are placed in a residential building with walls made of concrete with windows. Ue is placed at the second floor and distances 30 meters far from the eNB, which is placed at the first floor.

Test #7 Outdoor -> Indoor with Okumura Hata model
-------------------------------------------------

This test validates the outdoor to indoor transmissions for large distances. In this case the UE is placed in a residential building with wall made of concrete with windows and distances 2000 meters from the outdoor eNB.

Test #8 Outdoor -> Indoor with ITU1411 model
-------------------------------------------------

This test validates the outdoor to indoor transmissions for short distances. In this case the UE is placed in a residential building with walls made of concrete with windows and distances 100 meters from the outdoor eNB.


Test #9 Indoor -> Outdoor with ITU1411 model
-------------------------------------------------

This test validates the outdoor to indoor transmissions for very short distances. In this case the eNB is placed in the second floor of a residential building with walls made of concrete with windows and distances 100 meters from the outdoor UE (i.e., LoS communication). Therefore the height gain has to be included in the pathloss evaluation.

Test #10 Indoor -> Outdoor with ITU1411 model
-------------------------------------------------

This test validates the outdoor to indoor transmissions for short distances. In this case the eNB is placed in the second floor of a residential building with walls made of concrete with windows and distances 500 meters from the outdoor UE (i.e., NLoS communication). Therefore the height gain has to be included in the pathloss evaluation.


System Test
~~~~~~~~~~~

The aim of the system test is to verify the integration of the BuildingPathlossModel with the ns3 simulator and in particular with the lte module. The test exploits a set of three pre calculated losses for generating the expected SINR at the receiver counting the transmission and the noise powers. These SINR values are compared with the results obtained from a lte simulation. The losses are calculated off-line with an Octave script (/test/reference/lte-pathloss.m).


Shadowing Test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This unit test is intended to verify the statistics distribution characteristics of the shadowing are the one expected. The shadowing is modeled according to a normal distribution with mean 0 and variable standard deviation (usually called sigma), according to the standard models used in literature.
The test generates 10,000 samples of shadowing by subtracting the deterministic component from the total loss returned by the ``BuildingPathlossModel``. The mean and variance of the shadowing samples are then used to verify whether the 99% confidence interval is respected by the sequence generated by the simulator.
