src/lte/doc/source/lte-rlc-design.rst, before:

.. include:: replace.txt


****************
RLC Layer Design
****************


UM/AM RLC Entities
==================

The RLC entity is specified in the 3GPP technical specification [TS36322]_. We implement two of the
three types of RLC entities: UM RLC entity and AM RLC entity.

The RLC entities provide the RLC service interface to upper PDCP layer and the MAC service interface
to lower MAC layer. The RLC entities use the PDCP service interface from upper PDCP layer and
the MAC service interface from lower MAC layer.

The following figure shows the implementation model of the RLC entities and its relationship
with all the other entities and services in the protocol stack:

.. figure:: figures/lte-rlc-implementation-model.*

   Implementation Model of PDCP, RLC and MAC entities and SAPs


Service Interfaces
==================

PDCP Service Interface
----------------------

The PDCP service interface is divided into two parts:

    * ``PdcpSapProvider`` service part is provided by the PDCP layer and used by the upper layer and
    * ``PdcpSapUser`` service part is provided by the upper layer and used by the PDCP layer.

PDCP Service Primitives
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following list specifies which service primitives are provided by the PDCP service interfaces:

    * ``PdcpSapProvider::TransmitRrcPdu``

        * The RRC entity uses this primitive to send an RRC PDU to the lower PDCP entity
          in the transmitter peer

    * ``PdcpSapUser::ReceiveRrcPdu``

        * The PDCP entity uses this primitive to send an RRC PDU to the upper RRC entity
          in the receiver peer

RLC Service Interface
---------------------

The RLC service interface is divided into two parts:

    * ``RlcSapProvider`` service part is provided by the RLC layer and used by the upper PDCP layer and
    * ``RlcSapUser`` service part is provided by the upper PDCP layer and used by the RLC layer.

The UM/AM RLC entities provide the same RLC service interface to the upper PDCP layer.

RLC Service Primitives
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following list specifies which service primitives are provided by the RLC service interfaces:

    * ``RlcSapProvider::TransmitPdcpPdu``

        * The PDCP entity uses this primitive to send a PDCP PDU to the lower RLC entity
          in the transmitter peer

    * ``RlcSapUser::ReceivePdcpPdu``

        * The RLC entity uses this primitive to send a PDCP PDU to the upper PDCP entity
          in the receiver peer

MAC Service Interface
---------------------

The MAC service interface is divided into two parts:

  * ``MacSapProvider`` service part is provided by the MAC layer and used by the upper RLC layer and
  * ``MacSapUser`` service part is provided by the upper RLC layer and used by the MAC layer.

MAC Service Primitives
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following list specifies which service primitives are provided by the MAC service interfaces:

    * ``MacSapProvider::TransmitPdu``

        * The RLC entity uses this primitive to send a RLC PDU to the lower MAC entity
          in the transmitter peer

    * ``MacSapProvider::ReportBufferStatus``

        * The RLC entity uses this primitive to report the MAC entity the size of pending buffers
          in the transmitter peer

    * ``MacSapUser::NotifyTxOpportunity``

        * The MAC entity uses this primitive to nofify the RLC entity a transmission opportunity

    * ``MacSapUser::ReceivePdu``

        * The MAC entity uses this primitive to send an RLC PDU to the upper RLC entity
          in the receiver peer


Interactions between entities and services
==========================================

Transmit operations in downlink
-------------------------------

The following sequence diagram shows the interactions between the different entities (RRC, PDCP,
AM RLC, MAC and MAC scheduler) of the eNB in downlink when data PDUs are sent by the upper layers.

Figure 1 shows how upper layers send data PDUs and how the data flow is processed by the different
entities/services of the LTE protocol stack. We will explain in detail only the processing related
to the AM RLC entity.

.. figure:: figures/lte-rlc-data-txon-dl.*

    Sequence diagram of data PDU transmission in downlink

The PDCP entity calls the Transmit_PDCP_PDU service primitive in order to send a data PDU. The AM RLC
entity processes this service primitive according to the AM data transfer procedures defined in
section 5.1.3 of [TS36322]_.

The simplified pseudocode of the processing of this service primitive follows:

    * Put the data SDU in the Transmission Buffer.
    * Compute the size of the buffers. How the size of buffers is computed is explained in detail hereafter.
    * Call Report_Buffer_Status service primitive of the eNB MAC entity in order to notify the eNB MAC
      entity the sizes of the buffers of the AM RLC entity. Then, the eNB MAC entity updates the buffer
      status in the MAC scheduler using the SchedDlRlcBufferReq service primitive.

Afterwards, when the MAC scheduler decides some data can be sent, the MAC entity notifies it to the
RLC entity, i.e. it calls the Notify_Tx_Opportunity service primitive, then the AM RLC entity does
the following:

    * Create (concatenate/segment) data PDU from the SDUs in the Transmission Buffer.
    * Move the data PDU from the Transmission Buffer to the Transmitted PDUs Buffer.
    * Update state variables according section 5.1.3.1.1 of [TS36322]_.
    * Call Transmit_PDU in order to send the data PDU to the MAC entity.

Retransmission in downlink
--------------------------

The following sequence diagram shows the interactions between the different entities (AM RLC, MAC
and MAC scheduler) of the eNB in downlink when data PDUs must be retransmitted by the AM RLC entity.

.. figure:: figures/lte-rlc-data-retx-dl.*

    Sequence diagram of data PDU retransmission in downlink

The transmitting AM RLC entity can receive STATUS PDUs from the peer AM RLC entity. STATUS PDUs are
sent according section 5.3.2 of [TS36322]_ and the processing of reception is made according
section 5.2.1 of [TS36322]_.

When a data PDUs is retransmitted from the Transmitted PDUs Buffer, it is also moved to the
Retransmission Buffer.

Transmit operations in uplink
-----------------------------

The following sequence diagram shows the interactions between the different entities of the UE (RRC,
PDCP, RLC and MAC) and the eNB (MAC and Scheduler) in uplink when data PDUs are sent by the upper
layers.

.. figure:: figures/lte-rlc-data-txon-ul.*

    Sequence diagram of data PDU transmission in uplink

It is similar to the sequence diagram in downlink. But in this case the Report_Buffer_Status is sent
from the UE MAC to the MAC Scheduler in the eNB over the air using the control channel.

Retransmission in uplink
------------------------

The following sequence diagram shows the interactions between the different entities of the UE (AM
RLC and MAC) and the eNB (MAC) in uplink when data PDUs must be retransmitted by the AM RLC entity.

.. figure:: figures/lte-rlc-data-retx-ul.*

    Sequence diagram of data PDU retransmission in uplink


AM data transfer
================

The processing of the data transfer in the AM RLC entity is explained in section 5.1.3 of [TS36322]_.
In this section we describe some details of the implementation of the RLC entity.

Management of buffers in transmit operations
--------------------------------------------

The AM RLC entity manages 3 buffers:

    * Transmission Buffer, it is the RLC SDU queue. The AM RLC entity enqueues the SDU in the
      Transmission Buffer, when it receives a SDU in the TransmitPdcpPdu service primitive from the
      upper PDCP entity.

    * Transmitted PDUs Buffer, it is the queue of transmitted RLC PDUs for which an ACK/NACK has not
      been received yet. The AM RLC entity also puts a copy of the transmitted PDU in the
      Transmitted PDUs Buffer, when it sends a PDU to the MAC entity.

    * Retransmission Buffer, it is the queue of RLC PDUs which are considered for retransmission
      (i.e., they have been NACKed). The AM RLC entity moves this PDU to the Retransmission Buffer,
      when it retransmits a PDU from the Transmitted Buffer.

We put a limit on the RLC buffer size and just silently drop SDUs when the buffer is full.

Calculation of the buffer size
------------------------------

The Transmission Buffer contains RLC SDUs. A RLC PDU is one or more SDU segments plus an RLC header.
The size of the RLC header of one RLC PDU depends on the number of SDU segments the PDU contains.

The Buffer size reported in the Report_Buffer_Size is calculated as the data size in the
Transmission Buffer plus an estimation of the RLC header size.

The estimation is calculated assuming one fixed RLC header per SDU in the Transmission Buffer.
This estimation avoids unnecessary segmentation of the SDUs in the Transmission Buffer if the MAC
layer notifies transmission opportunities big enough.

On the other side, if the MAC layer notifies small transmission opportunities, then segmentation
arises and the periodicity of the Report_Buffer_Status operation provides a better estimation for
the buffer size.

The exact value of the buffer size can never be calculated. It depends on the number of SDUs in the
Transmission Buffer, and the number of transmission opportunities the MAC entity gives to the
RLC entity. And this number is totally unknown.

Concatenation and Segmentation
------------------------------

The AM RLC entity generates and sends exactly one RLC PDU for each transmission opportunity even
if it is smaller than the size reported by the transmission opportunity. So for instance, if a
STATUS PDU is to be sent, then only this PDU will be sent in that transmission opportunity.

The segmentation and concatenation for the SDU queue of the AM RLC entity follows the same philosophy
as the same procedures of the UM RLC entity but there are new state variables (see section 7.1) only
present in the AM RLC entity.

It is noted that according to the 3GPP specs, there is no concatenation for the Retransmission Buffer.

Re-segmentation
---------------

Initially, we start without re-segmentation of the retransmission buffer. We just wait for a big
enough transmission opportunity. An ASSERT is triggered if smalls transmission opportunities are
received.

Afterwards, we will evaluate if it is feasible to implement it, or it is too complex.

Unsupported features
--------------------

We do not support the following procedures of [TS36322]_ :

    * “Send an indication of successful delivery of RLC SDU” (See section 5.1.3.1.1)
    * “Indicate to upper layers that max retransmission has been reached” (See section 5.2.1)
    * “SDU discard procedures” (See section 5.3)
    * “Re-establishment procedure” (See section 5.4)

We do not support any of the additional primitives of RLC SAP for AM RLC entity. In particular:

    * no SDU discard notified by PDCP (maybe we can consider it for M5, if needed)
    * no notification of successful / failed delivery by AM RLC entity to PDCP entity

Commit message:

updated LTE-EPC design documentation

src/lte/doc/source/lte-rlc-design.rst, after:

.. include:: replace.txt



Overview
++++++++

The RLC entity is specified in the 3GPP technical specification [TS36322]_, and comprises three different types of RLC: Transparent Mode (TM), Unacknowledge Mode (UM) and Acknowledged Mode (AM). We implement only the UM and the AM RLC entities.

The RLC entities provide the RLC service interface to upper PDCP layer and the MAC service interface
to lower MAC layer. The RLC entities use the PDCP service interface from upper PDCP layer and
the MAC service interface from lower MAC layer.

Figure :ref:`lte-rlc-implementation-model` shows the implementation model of the RLC entities and its relationship
with all the other entities and services in the protocol stack.

.. figure:: figures/lte-rlc-implementation-model.*

   Implementation Model of PDCP, RLC and MAC entities and SAPs


Service Interfaces
++++++++++++++++++

PDCP Service Interface
----------------------

The PDCP service interface is divided into two parts:

    * the ``PdcpSapProvider`` part is provided by the PDCP layer and used by the upper layer and
    * the ``PdcpSapUser`` part is provided by the upper layer and used by the PDCP layer.

PDCP Service Primitives
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following list specifies which service primitives are provided by the PDCP service interfaces:

    * ``PdcpSapProvider::TransmitRrcPdu``

        * The RRC entity uses this primitive to send an RRC PDU to the lower PDCP entity
          in the transmitter peer

    * ``PdcpSapUser::ReceiveRrcPdu``

        * The PDCP entity uses this primitive to send an RRC PDU to the upper RRC entity
          in the receiver peer

RLC Service Interface
---------------------

The RLC service interface is divided into two parts:

    * the ``RlcSapProvider`` part is provided by the RLC layer and used by the upper PDCP layer and
    * the ``RlcSapUser`` part is provided by the upper PDCP layer and used by the RLC layer.

Both the UM and the AM RLC entities provide the same RLC service interface to the upper PDCP layer.

RLC Service Primitives
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following list specifies which service primitives are provided by the RLC service interfaces:

    * ``RlcSapProvider::TransmitPdcpPdu``

        * The PDCP entity uses this primitive to send a PDCP PDU to the lower RLC entity
          in the transmitter peer

    * ``RlcSapUser::ReceivePdcpPdu``

        * The RLC entity uses this primitive to send a PDCP PDU to the upper PDCP entity
          in the receiver peer

MAC Service Interface
---------------------

The MAC service interface is divided into two parts:

  * the ``MacSapProvider`` part is provided by the MAC layer and used by the upper RLC layer and
  * the ``MacSapUser``  part is provided by the upper RLC layer and used by the MAC layer.

MAC Service Primitives
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The following list specifies which service primitives are provided by the MAC service interfaces:

    * ``MacSapProvider::TransmitPdu``

        * The RLC entity uses this primitive to send a RLC PDU to the lower MAC entity
          in the transmitter peer

    * ``MacSapProvider::ReportBufferStatus``

        * The RLC entity uses this primitive to report the MAC entity the size of pending buffers
          in the transmitter peer

    * ``MacSapUser::NotifyTxOpportunity``

        * The MAC entity uses this primitive to nofify the RLC entity a transmission opportunity

    * ``MacSapUser::ReceivePdu``

        * The MAC entity uses this primitive to send an RLC PDU to the upper RLC entity
          in the receiver peer


Interactions between entities and services
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Transmit operations in downlink
-------------------------------

The following sequence diagram shows the interactions between the different entities (RRC, PDCP,
AM RLC, MAC and MAC scheduler) of the eNB in downlink when data PDUs are sent by the upper layers.

Figure 1 shows how upper layers send data PDUs and how the data flow is processed by the different
entities/services of the LTE protocol stack. We will explain in detail only the processing related
to the AM RLC entity.

.. figure:: figures/lte-rlc-data-txon-dl.*

    Sequence diagram of data PDU transmission in downlink

The PDCP entity calls the Transmit_PDCP_PDU service primitive in order to send a data PDU. The AM RLC
entity processes this service primitive according to the AM data transfer procedures defined in
section 5.1.3 of [TS36322]_.

The simplified pseudocode of the processing of this service primitive follows:

    * Put the data SDU in the Transmission Buffer.
    * Compute the size of the buffers. How the size of buffers is computed is explained in detail hereafter.
    * Call Report_Buffer_Status service primitive of the eNB MAC entity in order to notify the eNB MAC
      entity the sizes of the buffers of the AM RLC entity. Then, the eNB MAC entity updates the buffer
      status in the MAC scheduler using the SchedDlRlcBufferReq service primitive.

Afterwards, when the MAC scheduler decides some data can be sent, the MAC entity notifies it to the
RLC entity, i.e. it calls the Notify_Tx_Opportunity service primitive, then the AM RLC entity does
the following:

    * Create (concatenate/segment) data PDU from the SDUs in the Transmission Buffer.
    * Move the data PDU from the Transmission Buffer to the Transmitted PDUs Buffer.
    * Update state variables according section 5.1.3.1.1 of [TS36322]_.
    * Call Transmit_PDU in order to send the data PDU to the MAC entity.

Retransmission in downlink
--------------------------

The following sequence diagram shows the interactions between the different entities (AM RLC, MAC
and MAC scheduler) of the eNB in downlink when data PDUs must be retransmitted by the AM RLC entity.

.. figure:: figures/lte-rlc-data-retx-dl.*

    Sequence diagram of data PDU retransmission in downlink

The transmitting AM RLC entity can receive STATUS PDUs from the peer AM RLC entity. STATUS PDUs are
sent according section 5.3.2 of [TS36322]_ and the processing of reception is made according
section 5.2.1 of [TS36322]_.

When a data PDUs is retransmitted from the Transmitted PDUs Buffer, it is also moved to the
Retransmission Buffer.

Transmit operations in uplink
-----------------------------

The following sequence diagram shows the interactions between the different entities of the UE (RRC,
PDCP, RLC and MAC) and the eNB (MAC and Scheduler) in uplink when data PDUs are sent by the upper
layers.

.. figure:: figures/lte-rlc-data-txon-ul.*

    Sequence diagram of data PDU transmission in uplink

It is similar to the sequence diagram in downlink. But in this case the Report_Buffer_Status is sent
from the UE MAC to the MAC Scheduler in the eNB over the air using the control channel.

Retransmission in uplink
------------------------

The following sequence diagram shows the interactions between the different entities of the UE (AM
RLC and MAC) and the eNB (MAC) in uplink when data PDUs must be retransmitted by the AM RLC entity.

.. figure:: figures/lte-rlc-data-retx-ul.*

    Sequence diagram of data PDU retransmission in uplink


AM data transfer
++++++++++++++++

The processing of the data transfer in the AM RLC entity is explained in section 5.1.3 of [TS36322]_.
In this section we describe some details of the implementation of the RLC entity.

Management of buffers in transmit operations
--------------------------------------------

The AM RLC entity manages 3 buffers:

    * **Transmission Buffer**: it is the RLC SDU queue. The AM RLC entity enqueues the SDU in the
      Transmission Buffer, when it receives a SDU in the TransmitPdcpPdu service primitive from the
      upper PDCP entity.

    * **Transmitted PDUs Buffer**: it is the queue of transmitted RLC PDUs for which an ACK/NACK has not
      been received yet. The AM RLC entity also puts a copy of the transmitted PDU in the
      Transmitted PDUs Buffer, when it sends a PDU to the MAC entity.

    * **Retransmission Buffer**: it is the queue of RLC PDUs which are considered for retransmission
      (i.e., they have been NACKed). The AM RLC entity moves this PDU to the Retransmission Buffer,
      when it retransmits a PDU from the Transmitted Buffer.

We put a limit on the RLC buffer size and just silently drop SDUs when the buffer is full.

Calculation of the buffer size
------------------------------

The Transmission Buffer contains RLC SDUs. A RLC PDU is one or more SDU segments plus an RLC header.
The size of the RLC header of one RLC PDU depends on the number of SDU segments the PDU contains.

The Buffer size reported in the Report_Buffer_Size is calculated as the data size in the
Transmission Buffer plus an estimation of the RLC header size.

The estimation is calculated assuming one fixed RLC header per SDU in the Transmission Buffer.
This estimation avoids unnecessary segmentation of the SDUs in the Transmission Buffer if the MAC
layer notifies transmission opportunities big enough.

On the other side, if the MAC layer notifies small transmission opportunities, then segmentation
arises and the periodicity of the Report_Buffer_Status operation provides a better estimation for
the buffer size.

The exact value of the buffer size can never be calculated. It depends on the number of SDUs in the
Transmission Buffer, and the number of transmission opportunities the MAC entity gives to the
RLC entity. And this number is totally unknown.

Concatenation and Segmentation
------------------------------

The AM RLC entity generates and sends exactly one RLC PDU for each transmission opportunity even
if it is smaller than the size reported by the transmission opportunity. So for instance, if a
STATUS PDU is to be sent, then only this PDU will be sent in that transmission opportunity.

The segmentation and concatenation for the SDU queue of the AM RLC entity follows the same philosophy
as the same procedures of the UM RLC entity but there are new state variables (see section 7.1) only
present in the AM RLC entity.

It is noted that according to the 3GPP specs, there is no concatenation for the Retransmission Buffer.

Re-segmentation
---------------

Initially, we start without re-segmentation of the retransmission buffer. We just wait for a big
enough transmission opportunity. An ASSERT is triggered if smalls transmission opportunities are
received.

Afterwards, we will evaluate if it is feasible to implement it, or it is too complex.

Unsupported features
--------------------

We do not support the following procedures of [TS36322]_ :

    * “Send an indication of successful delivery of RLC SDU” (See section 5.1.3.1.1)
    * “Indicate to upper layers that max retransmission has been reached” (See section 5.2.1)
    * “SDU discard procedures” (See section 5.3)
    * “Re-establishment procedure” (See section 5.4)

We do not support any of the additional primitives of RLC SAP for AM RLC entity. In particular:

    * no SDU discard notified by PDCP (maybe we can consider it for M5, if needed)
    * no notification of successful / failed delivery by AM RLC entity to PDCP entity
